Test, test, test, test, test.
Talking to Dennis McFarlane.
It was a pleasure as soon as you will take.
Thank you.
How should we enter the... You know, I find some... Thank you very much, by the way, for sending me the other books.
You're welcome.
Because there are certain themes and parallels.
We have ghosts that show up.
We have music that shows up.
We have suicides, fallen bodies out of windows.
Can we enter there?
Sure, yeah.
As a matter of fact, I was thinking about that this morning.
I was thinking about... Well, I guess because I was thinking about your coming here and anticipating sort of questions about recurrent themes in the work and stuff.
What I was thinking about it was that how that's something that I learn as I look back on the work.
You know what I mean?
I don't sit down and think... As a matter of fact, every once in a while I think...
I don't know what I'm going to do next, but I'll be damned if I'm going to write about alcoholism.
I'll be damned if there's going to be a suicide, or anybody jumping out of a window, or any prescient dreams.
You know, because I look back and think, yeah, you know, sort of like when John Irving became so famous with Garp, and then you saw these bears everywhere, and everybody's going, what in the world is this guy's thing for bears?
And he came right back again with bears in the Hotel New Hampshire.
Yeah, yeah.
But, you know, I mean, that's because I think so much of it is unconscious, you know?
I mean, as I said, I mean, it's in retrospect that I notice that, oh, yeah, there are these sort of recurring things.
Yeah, it really is.
I mean, even right down to the fall out of the window, though?
I mean, you know, I think with something like falling out of a window, there's a moment when...
I have to make the artistic decision, perhaps.
I mean, I honestly can't tell you, I don't remember whether I thought, oh, I can't have this girl in A Face at the Window fall out of a window because somebody fell out of a window in the music room.
I don't even know if I had a moment like that.
But if I did, I clearly made the decision to go ahead and do it.
I guess you anticipate the question.
Had you had that moment, it wouldn't have stopped you from going...
I don't think so, not in that case.
What is there about that?
I mean, can you try to examine it?
What is there about that image?
I have so many things that seem to need to be examined.
That doesn't seem like one I need to really focus on.
I don't believe I have.
Well, I mean, that's one, but... I don't know.
I think one of the reasons that something like that would be repeatable is because it's not so unusual.
It's not like something completely...
Weird.
I mean, people do fall out of windows, you know.
So, I don't know.
It doesn't mean anything to me.
I mean, I can't come up with some sort of... But it certainly must have some metaphoric significance for you.
Maybe not.
I don't think it does.
It's just a device that you use in two books.
Yeah.
I mean, I wish I had a more interesting answer, but...
I don't think I do.
I guess maybe that's what I was reaching for.
Yeah, yeah.
No, I don't think I have a more interesting answer than that.
Do you see, no, I've read that you started writing at, what, 27?
Something like that.
That's amazing.
Oh, you mean?
The fact that you started at, you know, some people might consider that young, but I would say that, you know, you'd done other things and tried other things at that point.
Yeah.
And you probably really not considered being a writer or writing was your,
I considered being a writer when I was very young.
I think when I went away to college.
I was a freshman.
Which was?
1968 at Southwestern at Memphis, in Memphis, Tennessee.
Good, Memphis takes me.
Oh, good, good.
Well, that's where I did my freshman year, and it was 1968, which was the year of the sanitation workers' strike.
And the year that Martin Luther King was killed.
See, he was killed in the spring of 68.
And I was a cub reporter on the college newspaper, and I was doing some pieces about the sanitation workers' strike.
And I was caught up in all of that.
I was in the march the day of the riots.
And I was also in my freshman year of school at a time when all this stuff was happening.
So I was very...
caught up in everything that was sort of sweeping the country at the time.
But I also thought, maybe I'll be a writer.
And I wrote a short story.
I was in a freshman English class.
A writer thinking in terms of you were doing some journalism.
A fiction writer, you thought?
Yeah, no, I was thinking about being a fiction writer.
And I wrote a short story for my advanced English class.
And somebody suggested I send it to the Atlantic Monthly, which I did.
And after a few weeks, I got the rejection slip back from the Atlantic Monthly.
And I decided, well, I guess I wasn't meant to be a writer after all.
On the strength of one rejection.
Yeah.
I mean, that's how naive I was about it, you know.
I mean, I just thought, oh, well, this didn't work.
And then I really put the idea on the shelf for many years.
Many years.
So this was 68 years ago?
I was 68.
I mean, you know, back in those days, when I say many years, it seemed like longer than it seems to me now.
So maybe, you know, we're talking about like seven or eight years or something.
Because I think it was in 1975 or 76 that I decided to try my hand at it again.
And in both those instances, it was because somebody had told me I should do it.
In other words, I hadn't a clue what I should do.
I was really like this kind of lost soul in terms of an identity and a career path and all that kind of stuff, you know.
So it was because in my senior year of high school, an English teacher had said, I think you ought to think about being a writer.
And then when I was in college...
another, a college professor in English, I think it was in a Shakespeare course, did the same thing, said to me, you know, I think you ought to think about being a writer.
I guess they had seen some ability or some talent in papers that I was doing for their classes.
And so in both those cases, you know, it was because somebody else had said, and because I was so lost, I just thought, oh, okay, there's an idea.
Well, there certainly is natural talent, yeah.
It's very, it's beautifully written.
material.
Thank you.
Let me say, it's, I mean, I could see reading a paper, I might even say the same thing.
The kid's got some ability, you know.
Yeah.
I'd love to see more, you know, if I can see that.
Let's dispense with the, I mean, I read about the training to be a musician and stage fright.
Maybe if you could give me some quotes on that.
I have other quotes.
I mean, basically correct what I've read about this
fright kind of a thing?
Well, I mean, it's true that I experienced a lot of performance anxiety as a pianist, but if I have anything, I don't know about correct, I mean, if I have anything to say about stage fright, it's something that's been... Performance anxiety is a much... Well, it brings it a little bit down to earth for me, because what happened was that, what happened originally with that was that the New York Times Book Review was
called me up to do a little yeah and well you know how people are always trying to make a story get a story and I mentioned in passing that I had studied music in college and that I'd had stage fright that I'd had performance anxiety when it came to performing and so that was one of the things that you know made me think that maybe I wasn't going to have a career there unless I could somehow get past that
And then the next thing I see is that we owe this book to stage fright.
So it had been like a small detail.
It's taken out by the Washington Post.
Oh, and everybody.
It's not a bad angle.
I promise I won't leave with it.
That's good.
I've tried to play it down.
I'll use it.
I can't tell you I won't, because it's valid.
Sure.
Actually, I intend to use it to ask another question, I think, that's more searching.
I give a lot of talks, and I love it, and it doesn't bother me at all.
They go up with notes, you know, I wing it and I do it.
Obviously performance in public rattles you, I guess, a bit, or you have anxious moments about it, I guess, about doing it.
I think that as a writer, however, I think that as a performing artist,
you do get an immediate response from your audience.
You know if you've been good or not, if your work has been well-received.
There's no doubt about it.
As a writer, on the other hand, and as you pointed out earlier, you almost work in a vacuum for a while, don't you, for a long time.
And then, of course, the book is done, and your editor might be reassuring you, but then you really do have to wait, and you're kind of at that point now.
Do you have any anxious moments as a writer?
about the response, or has this allayed the anxiety?
Well, you're talking about two different kinds of anxiety.
One is performance anxiety, which I really don't suffer.
I mean, I just don't... Oh, so that was... I don't have that.
I mean, I think... So that was really my true bit, is that right?
I think if you were to ask me to play the piano in front of an audience now, I'd still, you know, be shaking like a leaf.
It's just not the same.
I can do the same thing.
I get up and talk to large audiences without notes and so on and so forth.
It doesn't bother you.
It doesn't bother me at all.
I mean, I'm very comfortable doing it.
I mean, I may experience a little nerves right before I start talking.
It really did, and I think it's completely different.
I mean, actually performing a piece of music is different from reading something that's already been written or just...
I don't know, talking is completely different to me from performing.
Yeah, but I'm trying to make the leap also to the writing.
Yeah.
Because that is performing.
And it is intended to generate a response.
Yeah.
I guess I'm saying, do you have performance anxiety about your writing?
Well, sort of, I guess.
I mean, I guess I have sort of some form of that, but it just feels like a completely different thing.
I mean, you know, trying to start something new, there's always a little anxiety about, oh, is this going to work?
And, you know, there are all those kinds of feelings.
Right now, you know, as you pointed out, being at this place where I have a book coming out and I'm anticipating what the public response is going to be, that produces some
late night anxiety.
You know, I wake up sometimes in the middle of the night and think about it.
Do you really?
But not very much.
I mean, you know, this is my third time out and I feel a little more seasoned.
I also feel like I have a lot clearer view of how much luck is involved in this crazy thing, you know, that's happening.
When I wrote The Music Room, my first book,
I thought it was kind of a quiet, small literary book that might, if I was lucky, somebody would buy it for the minimal amount that was paid for first novels.
And if I was even luckier, it might get a little attention in some literary settings.
And then it took off like wildfire, you know, and we sold film rights for six figures.
It was a New York Times bestseller.
It was all, I mean, you know, just, and nobody anticipated that.
Then for my second book, for which I got a nice big fat advance based on what had happened with The Music Room, it was actually brought out as a bestseller, you know, with lots of, you know, promotion behind it and
And I just got caught up in that whole sort of scenario of, yeah, why not?
I'm going to have another bestseller.
And it didn't, although I think that it's every bit as good as The Music Room, and in some ways even better.
I think it's a more mature novel than The Music Room.
It fell a little flat by comparison in the marketplace.
Say it's sales and marketplace, but how about reviews?
reviews were, with a couple of exceptions, almost universally rave reviews.
And it was more widely reviewed than The Music Room.
Go figure, huh?
Go figure is exactly right.
And so that was very hard for me to go through, you know, that one disappointment after another, after another, after another.
No film rights, no, you know, low sales and all this kind of stuff.
I had sort of an opposite experience in a lot of ways.
In a commercial way, I had an opposite experience from what I had with the music room.
So the third time out, it's sort of like I've seen both, you know, pictures, and I just feel like, well, yeah, now I know.
So when I begin to feel that anxiety about, oh, I wonder what's going to happen with the book, and I wonder, you know, am I going to get creamed in the press, so forth, what I'm able to do is,
remember that this really is something that nobody can predict.
So I'm able to let it go a lot quicker, you know.
So I'm not like lying awake for hours churning about this stuff.
Sometimes I think about it briefly.
And then I think, oh, yeah, well.
It does sound like that the concern is more commercial than it is literary.
It absolutely is more commercial than literary.
I mean, I've done my literary job.
Yeah.
You know what I mean?
I wrote the best book that I feel that I could write, and I got really good advice along the way, and I improved it.
And I just feel like, you know, it's not, I don't by any means think it's the greatest book anybody's ever written, or I don't have any kind of superlative notions about the book, but I do feel like, you know, it has some merit, and I did the best I could.
And I think I even see some of the ways in which it's limited, as all books are, ultimately.
But that's not... And then somebody's going to get it or they're not going to get it.
And I have no control over that.
And I have been able to see that when you... Maybe you've seen this, too.
When you write a book, that you're going to get a very wide range of reactions.
It's such a subjective...
this business of reviewing books.
You know, people are bringing their life experience and their hang-ups and their pet peeves and their buttons to be pushed and all that kind of stuff.
Yeah, their baggage to the process.
So the exact same story is going to strike one person in a way that's going to make them absolutely hate it and dismiss it.
and another person's going to absolutely love it.
Martin Nemus, you know, he basically expects, told me, that, you know, 50%, you want, you see, the expectation is 50% are going to like it, and 50% aren't.
I mean, the critics, if that's what you get, you figure, great, that's, I'm doing my job, for precisely the reasons that you just... I've been really lucky, you know, with reviewers, because I have, I mean, it's got nothing like 50-50, I mean, it's been much more, much more weighted on the side of the
favorable reviews and um but you know I'm at a point right now with this new book which is coming out in a couple of months um where there's been one well you saw obviously saw the PW review which was a rave from the first word to the last and then I guess there was a Kirkus review that was really Kirkus is tough um I think the word was nasty was a word that was um
passed on to me.
I have not seen it, and I was told, don't bother looking at it.
Kirkus is so unpredictable.
I had great Kirkus and a really bitchy PW, which surprised me.
Oh, isn't that interesting?
Well, that's what I mean then.
You see exactly what I mean then.
It's about who gets it, who gets assigned it.
All that stuff.
That's what I mean about so much luck involved, you know.
So, you know, it's a hard place to be, and I'll be glad when it's over.
The sort of waiting I find to be a little difficult, because it occupies my mind a little bit.
But as I said, it's a lot easier the third time out than it was before.
Let's talk, you said that...
your first effort was rejected by the, was it The Atlantic, I guess?
Yeah.
So then how did you go from there to publishing with The New Yorker?
I mean, your first story was published with The New Yorker, is that right?
Yeah, my first published story was in The New Yorker.
And when was that?
Do you remember the name of the story?
The name of the story was Lullaby.
Uh-huh.
Lullaby.
And what year was it published?
It must have been 1979 or 1980.
somewhere around in there, because I know I'd just gone back to graduate school to study creative writing.
And I'd done one semester in the program, and then I sold his story to the New Yorker.
We can find out what year it was.
I'll give you a call at some point.
Okay.
They'd like to know that.
Oh, I can find out before you leave, because I'm sure I have a copy of it somewhere.
So how did you get back on track?
I mean, okay, fine, I wrote a story, they don't want it, now I'm not going to write.
But then you came back to it.
Well, you know, I did a lot of stuff that was kind of like, you know, floundering around, getting lost in the counterculture, going out to California, doing drugs, you know, just being a real, genuine, bona fide lost soul.
Hmm.
for a long time and really still didn't have a clue what I was going to do with my life.
Eventually, I ended up back in New York, still just being a wanderer.
And after living in New York for a little while, I enrolled in Brooklyn College and studied music because I had studied the piano as a child.
So again, I'm like grasping, you know, for things where I thought, well, here's something I could do.
I have some musical talent.
And by the time I finished the music education, I just thought, there's nothing about this that I want to do.
I'm not interested in teaching music in a school somewhere.
I was sort of disenchanted with the whole notion of it.
So that's when it occurred to me to try writing again.
And I guess I was a little more serious about it then.
I was a little more mature.
Not a lot more mature, but a little more.
and sort of understood that you didn't quit on the basis of one rejection of one story.
So I started writing stories and reading stories by people that had been told to me were masters of the short story.
And in 1980, I enrolled in a creative writing program for graduate school.
That was at Goddard College in Vermont.
And I studied with Frank Conroy my first semester.
I learned everything from him and published a story in The New Yorker.
It all happened really fast, and I thought, cool.
How did that work?
Did you submit it?
Did Frank submit it?
No, I submitted it.
I submitted it, but it was a story that I had written for him during the term that we were working together.
Did he encourage you to submit it?
I don't think so.
I don't remember his encouraging me to submit it.
He clearly must have liked it.
I think he did.
Yeah, he liked me.
He liked my work.
He saw something in it.
He was a mentor for me while I worked with him.
And then, of course, what proceeded from that was this sort of odd thing of having...
published your first published story in The New Yorker, and then they didn't take anything for eight years.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So that's its own sort of... And did you submit a lot of things afterwards?
Oh, I submitted everything.
Everything I wrote went to them, and there were lots of close calls.
There were plenty of stories along the way that they would send back and say, we really love this.
Would you consider...
you know, changing this, this, this, and this, and, you know, slut that I am, I would change everything they asked me to and send it back in, and then they'd say, oh, gee, you know, that really doesn't quite work to do that that way, does it?
You know?
Were you working with different editors each time?
I worked with, not each time, but over the course of those years, I worked with a few different editors.
I ended up, I think, working with Fran Kiernan, who...
Then, when she left The New Yorker, went to work as a book editor at Tickner and Fields, who then was the editor who bought The Music Room.
How do you spell her name?
Kiernan is K-I-E-R-N-A-N, first name Fran.
So you had worked with her.
Yeah, but she never bought a story.
But that's fine.
So then what happened?
Tell me how the first novel came to be.
Did you have an agent at this point?
Oh, yeah.
I got an agent pretty early on because, see, I had put some stories together.
One of them was published in The New Yorker, and a few were published in... That was Lullaby.
Lullaby.
In 79 or 80, and we'll check the date.
There was one other story that had been published in Mademoiselle, and then there were some stories that had been published in Small Literary Quarterlies.
So I had imagined myself as a story writer who would bring out a collection of stories.
And it was during the time when there was kind of a, you know, stories were getting a little more attention for a while with Raymond Carver and people like that.
And so it seemed like a real possibility for me.
Edie and Toby Wolfe.
Right, right.
It was kind of enjoying a little heyday.
And what happened universally was that I got an agent who was Gail Hockman at Brandt & Brandt.
Spelt.
H-O-C-H-M-A-N, first name Gail, G-A-I-L, at Brant and Brant, B-R-A-N-D-T.
This is in New York.
And she sent my manuscript of stories around to a lot of different publishers.
And almost universally, everybody said, you know, these are great, you're great, please let us see your novels.
very hard to launch an unknown writer with a collection of stories.
Absolutely true.
They were looking for, you know, even if it had been like stories that had a kind of common theme, like they were all about characters in the same town, or they were all... Packages.
Yeah, you know, I mean, but they, you know, they were, they were all different.
Still wouldn't sell.
Yeah, so, um, so everybody passed, and, um,
And so I really, you know, I finally decided, okay, I guess I've got to write a novel.
I didn't really especially want to.
Why?
I don't know.
It just wasn't a form that I read very much.
I didn't have any great appreciation for it.
And I couldn't figure out how to.
write something that was extended, you know?
I mean, I just couldn't... So your mindset was the shorter form?
It really was.
This was your career goal then, basically, as a story writer.
Yeah, I think so.
I mean, insofar as I had a career goal, I think, you know, I don't know, I mean, in a way, I really didn't know what I was doing.
I just knew that this was something that I rather enjoyed doing, writing stories, and so I'd keep doing it for a while.
I think I had some vague notion that I might be interested in writing drama at some point,
But what became clear, you know, from all the input that I got, all the feedback that I got, was that I really needed to write a novel.
So I did.
Very, you know, career-oriented in a way that a lot of my generation was.
Yeah, right.
But there was a piece in the New York Times just a couple weeks ago about, you know, the dearth of Sirius Brownler on Broadway.
I know, I know.
I think it's all part of this whole dumbing down thing.
I do too.
Which I'm writing about in my new book, by the way.
From here I'm going over to do an interview with Henry Louis Gates, Jr.
Right, right.
Well, your book being, you know, taken off their list is part of the whole dumbing down thing, you know.
It was a total arrogance.
Well, doesn't it have something to do with the fact that now publishing, like everything else, is owned by all the same people?
Yeah.
That's right.
I mean, that's why it seems to be so pervasive, because...
Everything is owned by the same four people.
Yeah, but they also think in a global sense.
It's not just the book, it's this and that, and the CD thing.
Because they own the same things.
Because they all own the same things.
Right.
So they're looking at all the sort of different divisions of their company.
I don't know if you watch CNN, but down below it's now a Time Warner company.
They make it very clear.
And then all of a sudden now it's CNN, SI, Sports Illustrated, which is a Time Warner thing.
I know.
they do features on the time and of the year, which they've never, you know, I'm saying.
Right, right.
All this incestuous kind of behavior.
Yeah, and there's some sort of at least quasi-serious repercussions.
I mean, aside from the sort of cultural repercussions that has to do with what you call dumbing down of the culture, there's some sort of more specific.
I heard a report recently on the radio about
I don't know the details exactly, but there was a movie that was based on the book.
I think it was called Strange Justice that was about Clarence Thomas, a serious book about the Anita Hill Clarence Thomas.
I guess that there was a movie made for TV, and maybe it was a Ted Turner movie, and then when they merged with Time Warner or something.
They were basically bought by Time Warner.
Yeah, so when that happened, then it turned out that Time Warner had some serious business in the court,
So the movie was pulled.
They couldn't show the movie because it shows Clarence Thomas in the not-so-great light.
You know, so then we have, like, really sort of, like, what is, you know... What are their ethical considerations?
Real, serious ethical considerations, yeah.
I don't mean myself talking, but... Okay, so let's get back on to how this first novel came to be.
How you came to write it and sell it.
Well, you know, I'm having a little trouble remembering...
the exact details of the music room, but I completed it.
And where did you write it?
Where were you living at that time?
We had moved to the Boston area by then.
We weren't in this house, but we were nearby.
And I wrote it, and I wrote it really pretty fast.
I think the first draft I was written in a year.
And...
What I can't recall is exactly why it went.
What I remember was that it went to Knopp first, and now I can't remember exactly why it went there first.
No, it's a nice house.
But it did, and they were interested, actually.
Gordon Lish is there.
Yeah.
It was an editor named Bobby... Anyway, I can't remember her last name right now.
But she was wonderful because what she did was, her criticisms of the book ultimately helped me a lot in revising it.
And I revised it considerably.
I mean, essentially the last third of the book was completely rewritten.
And then I guess we were sort of obligated then to go back to Knopf with the new version.
And they kind of sat on it for a while.
They kind of, you know...
Somebody was out of town, and, you know, they were puffing and puffing, because I know six months.
Yeah, they liked it, but they had a lot of questions, and the questions that they were asking I felt a little impatient with,
And I guess in general, I can remember saying to my agent at that point, I said, you know what would be nice would be if I had the feeling that they wanted to publish the book, that they were going to publish it with some enthusiasm because they loved it.
And my agent, being the sort of unhyping kind of person that she is, said, well, you know, it's a quiet book.
And I kind of slunk away with my tail between my legs thinking, oh, I wrote a quiet book for me, and I guess I can't expect any more.
But that was the way I felt.
I felt like they were doing me a big favor, you know, by publishing it.
But then they continued to sit on it, and in the meantime, this person I knew, Fran Kiernan, was working at Tickner and Fields and wanted to see the book.
And so... You'd heard this yourself or through your agent, or...?
Well, you know, Fran by then was a friend, and so I knew that she was interested in seeing the book, but she also knew that we were obligated to come up at the time, and she just asked, you know, if they turned it down, I'd like to see it.
So I think at some point my agent gave them an ultimatum and said, we've got to have an answer this weekend, or we're pulling it and going somewhere else, and
and whoever it was who could sign off on it was out of town.
It worked out, actually.
It worked out.
It worked out really, you know, in my favor, I think, because then I went to Tigner and Fields on a Friday.
Fran took it home and read it over the weekend, and they made an offer on Monday.
Wow.
Which showed, you know, which that's me, which showed...
the kind of enthusiasm that I'd been missing.
I mean, they really loved the book, and they wanted to buy it.
Isn't that something, huh?
Yeah.
Was it a good offer?
Well, it was more than I expected to get at the time.
It was $25,000 for a first novel by an unknown.
Nothing wrong with that.
Yeah.
And then a whole lot of things followed, you know, which were exciting, which was, you know, like a lengthy excerpt was taken by The New Yorker, and, you know, sometimes...
Down the line, Goober Peters bought the film rights, optioned the film rights for a lot of money.
Did they ever produce it?
No, they never did, and it changed hands a few times, and ultimately the rights were bought outright by the producer, Scott Rudin, who I think is still at Paramount.
And, you know, it's languished there for all these years.
But you got a pretty decent piece of change, though.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I did.
Six figures?
Yes, yes.
High six figures, low six figures?
They paid, I think, I don't know if I want to say the figure, less than half a million, but more than a quarter of a million.
There you go.
And... That can make your day.
Yeah, it made my day.
And they...
And then what I know about that is that Scott Rudin was very enthusiastic about the book.
He loved the book.
He hired the playwright, the New York playwright, John Robin Bates, to write the screenplay.
John Robin Bates wrote a screenplay.
I have not seen the screenplay, but through the grapevine I heard that it was good and that Scott Rudin loved it.
What happens?
Where's the green light?
So it may or may not ever see production, but it might.
So what kind of money into something?
What are they thinking?
Well, I just think that somebody who's as successful as Scott Rudin has a lot of projects going at once.
And so I think, you know, for whatever reasons, some things take priorities over others.
And I really honestly don't know whether this will happen, but
There's a production bonus in my contract, so I get another little piece of change if they actually do go to production.
How long do they own these rates?
Forever.
It's not an option in this case that we actually sold it.
It's not like 10 grand or 20 grand either.
Right.
It's not an option.
So they own it.
Did you get similar action with the second novel?
No.
With the second novel, nobody bought the film rights, although we tried to sell it.
We tried to sell the film rights.
Because the music room had been bought for film rights, we were anticipating selling film rights to the second book, and a lot of producers and a lot of studios were really interested in seeing it.
You know how they are.
They call frequently and say, when is he going to be done?
We can't wait to read his book, and da-da-da.
So, you know, you can get caught up in that.
They want a one-page pitch, too.
Well, I think that they're actually interested in seeing, in reading the book.
But I also get the sense that they're all interested in, like, getting it first.
And so some of the enthusiasm is about, you know, getting to see it first.
But in any case...
You know, School for the Blind was about old people, and old people really don't play very well in Hollywood.
I mean, if you think about it, it's sort of amusing.
You know, kind of like, it's amusing to see how... Sunshine Boys are the... Yeah, yeah, or Grumpy Old Men.
Grumpy Old Men.
Oh, it was the one with Hume Cronin and Jessica Tandy, Delicate Balance, or whatever.
That was an L.B.
play, wasn't it, the old people?
Yeah.
But yeah, you know, there's this kind of take in... Very rarely do you see it, actually.
You see it very rarely, because it's not big box office.
Driving Miss Daisy.
Yeah, well, that was the exception, you know, because it was a...
It had an old character, but for the most part, I don't think that their big box office in Hollywood was not very interested in the old people.
I thought it was tight, though.
It was nice.
It's a nice, tight kind of a narrative.
I think it would make a great movie.
I do.
Do you write visually, by the way?
Very visually.
And a lot of times when I'm writing novels, I see it as a movie in my head.
I really do, yeah.
I mean, not complete with actors in the roles, but I see the scenes, yeah.
And that works well for me, because it seems to me if there's a kind of cinematic sensibility going on in my mind when I'm writing it, then I'm bringing a visual aspect to the prose that is important, I think, in good fiction.
So, let me just dispense with, it was Fran who bought it.
Did she edit it also?
She line edited it.
She line edited it the way that, you know, New Yorker editors line edit, you know, manuscripts of the New Yorker.
And so it was great.
I couldn't have had.
I mean, it was wonderful.
And was she also the editor for your second book?
No.
It's kind of a complicated story, but while she,
She was the editor on The Music Room, but while The Music Room, before The Music Room was published, she left Tickner and Fields, just quit.
And then, so I guess in that sense, it was kind of orphaned at Tickner and Fields.
At that point, John Sterling stepped in.
But the editing was done, thank goodness.
But the editing was done.
Or maybe it wasn't completed, but we made an arrangement.
that though she was no longer working with them... That's the definition.
Yeah, okay.
That though she was no longer with them, that she would see the editing to completion of the book.
So John Sterling stepped in and took over the book, and that's how it became a Houghton Mifflin book.
And it was published as a Houghton Mifflin book.
But he wasn't the editor on the music room, but he became my editor, and then so he was the editor for the second book.
Which explains why you...
You're with a new publisher now.
Right, because I followed John.
You followed John.
Right.
So we've taken care of the editor and the agent.
Do you still have the same agent?
Yes, I do.
Okay, so we've taken care of editor, agent, and just thinking of the things that they like.
Right.
Yeah, yeah.
Do you have a sense of what the sales figures were for the first two books?
No, I don't.
I mean, if I ever did, I've forgotten.
I find all that to be really sort of...
It's better if I don't pay very much attention to it.
Okay, but how many printings?
Well, you know, The Music Room, being a first novel by an unknown, went through a lot of printings, but they were small printings.
Yeah, and then I think that School for the Blind came out with a large printing, so there were a lot of leftovers or remainders.
Yeah, um...
And there were no subsequent printings, because they printed more than they needed the first time out.
But sales figures, I just don't.
Okay, well, if you had it, that would be good.
I can get it elsewhere.
You mentioned earlier, and I ask the question only because I find it relevant to the themes of the books, that you went through a period of self-destructive behavior,
and drinking are these things that are you drawing on your own experience and are these things that are being well inevitably yeah you know I mean I don't think that I'm I don't feel like I'm writing autobiographical fiction because the situations and the characters and
The plights and everything are so far away from my own life in all the particulars.
But inevitably, in the area of characterization, some things come in that are taken from my own life and from my own experience.
But this, apparently, is a matter of great concern for you, this understanding of self-destructive behavior.
Yeah, well, I'm really...
I mean, I think I feel at this point after finishing Face at the Window that I'm done with it and I don't want to do it anymore.
I'm tired of it and I have a sense that people are tired of hearing about it, too.
Do you feel that you understand it now?
Is it something that you've had to exercise in any kind of a way?
Oh, yeah, sure.
I mean, it's something that I've had to come to terms with in myself.
So, you know, when I'm writing about it, I think one of the reasons I'm writing about it is because
I'm figuring it out and I'm analyzing it and contemplating it and, you know, and in that sense, exercising it.
There are, in each of your books, there certainly is plot, a pretty good plot, and you do have a sense of mystery even, and almost even the detective genre comes into some, you know, I mean, trying to put new things out here.
Yeah.
Is this something that's been mindfully worked into your fiction?
Mindfully in the sense that it has felt necessary to me.
I mean, there's a mystery in all of your novels.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, I think there'll be probably one in my next one, too.
But you're not a mystery writer.
I'm not a mystery writer, but... Although we have a mystery writer here, you know, as a character.
Yeah, yeah.
My wife is...
writing her first novel, and it's a bona fide... Oh, really?
It's a bona fide mystery, yeah.
So... Your wife's your writer?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, yeah.
What was I saying?
We were talking about mysteries.
Oh, yeah.
Well, it's only mindful in the sense that it feels necessary to me, and I think it's connected to, you know, what I was talking about earlier about my having a problem with figuring out how to make something long.
It just seems to me that if you put a kind of question at the center of things that you can get some mileage out of it.
It's the kind of thing that you can keep coming back to again and again.
There's something to unravel.
There's something to figure out and to, you know, explore.
And so, I mean, you can explore...
other kinds of mysteries and I think my books do that but just in terms of the plot it helps me to have a sort of a mystery tied to the plot in some way to hang the exploration of other mysteries on it's the thing that far deeper mysteries I think yeah far deeper mysteries in the sense of like you know human mysteries or the mysteries about human character or
the psychological issues that are in the books and that sort of thing, that we can tolerate and even enjoy those kinds of explorations if there's this other thing that's carrying us forward in a narrative way.
Otherwise, you're reading a book that is a sort of prolonged exploration of human mystery.
And...
I think maybe better writers than me can do that and bring it off, but I seem to need to have this other thing to hang things on, just to carry me forward in a narrative sense.
Okay, now what happens is a question that I have to ask myself at the end of each chapter in order to write the next chapter.
So you don't have this thing figured out when you start writing?
No, I don't, although it's clear to me that I need to know a certain amount of stuff
before I'm able to even begin.
How well do you know the characters personally?
I don't think I know the characters very well.
And that to me is what is the most exploring that I do.
I kind of know them
in a kind of general sense, you know, the sort of way that I might know you now.
Even now?
You don't know the characters any better even now?
Oh, you mean after writing?
Oh, no, after writing I know them very well.
I mean, I've just spent two years with them, you know.
Let me ask you this.
Do you know more about them than the reader does?
Can you tell me things about them that the reader doesn't know?
I can certainly tell you things about them that I didn't explicitly put on the page, so in that sense there's more.
Do you understand what I'm going with of the question?
Maybe not.
Their biography, any specific things about them that helps you understand things that you have to know, but the reader doesn't necessarily.
Yeah, I think that there's certainly a lot of stuff like that.
Isn't that what they call in drama backstory?
I guess.
I think sometimes it's called subtext, sometimes it's called backstory.
It's the stuff that the actor who's playing the role knows about the character that really isn't in the play.
Yeah, right, exactly.
Yes.
Doctorow discussed this with me, and he said, you know, things, he said, there are things I have to know.
Right.
So it's clear to me.
Yes.
Things that I don't have to bother the reader with.
Right.
But for me to explain why the character, I have to understand.
You know, maybe there are incidents in this character's childhood.
Right.
that maybe happened that didn't find its way into the novel, but nevertheless, I'm just wondering if there are any kinds of things that, I mean, these characters, you say you don't know them that well when you're starting.
Are they real to you nonetheless?
They become real to me.
In fact, you know, there's this wonderful, again, I said before, I think that it's one of the things that I have enjoyed most about writing novels is spending that much time with the characters
and getting to know them better, see them come to life, see them become who they are, because I don't know, you know, I don't like figure them out completely before I start writing and then just kind of like put it down on the page.
As I'm writing, they're emerging for me.
Who they are is emerging for me.
And it's fun to see how that takes place.
I mean,
I think somewhere I wrote a little bit about this in maybe a talk that I gave or something about.
At some point, I'm aware of needing to become their... What would be the word?
Being sort of honest with them.
In other words... Well, not confessor, but...
It's almost a parental role in the sense of, like, you know, as parents, one of the things that we try to do is to allow our children to become who they truly are.
Mentor, perhaps?
Well, not mentor, more like sort of... Guide?
Well, encourager, loving them, you know, lover, and that says lover is the wrong connotation.
But, you know...
It's almost like being, to borrow a religious word, it's almost like being a steward.
You know, allowing them to be who they are without laying... Without dictating who they should be.
Dictating who they are or making them feel bad about who they are.
I mean, that's the kind of things that we try to do with kids as parents.
I mean, are you always happy with the way they turn out?
The characters?
Yeah.
Oh, no, I don't believe I am.
Because, I mean, Cook could have some...
Cook became really difficult for me.
He's a pain in the ass.
I was going to say, he's not the nicest person I've ever met.
He's not the nicest person.
Boy, does he go on, you know, with his sort of self-obsession and, you know.
And my challenge, my technical challenge with that character was to keep him interesting, you know, to make the way that he said things compelling enough, amusing enough
witty enough that a writer was willing to go on listening to him.
Not just a writer, but you have to think of me, too, the reader, don't you?
I meant to say reader.
I said writer, but I meant reader.
But the reader was willing to go on listening to him.
So I had to try to make his voice witty enough, amusing enough, engaging enough at turns.
that we'd listen to this stuff for however many pages it is.
And I experienced that as a writer.
Boy, I was glad to be done with him when I was done with him, because I'd just had enough.
I'd listened to him long enough.
Did it ever occur to you that maybe he was going on the wrong track and that he needed some behavior modification?
Well, I think that's who he is.
I mean, to me, that's who he is.
He's a person who is on the wrong track.
Uh-huh.
That's one of the essences of the novel, isn't it?
Well, yeah, and I think that comes back to what I said earlier about, you know, there'll be people who, when they read this book, they'll get it, and there'll be people who, when they read it, they don't get it.
And I think for the people who don't get it, they may be put off by it.
Because my notion here was that I took a fellow who was not entirely on the wrong track,
Because I think he's redeemable.
No, but he is a pain in the ass.
He's a pain in the ass.
He's self-centered.
I'd like to give him a shot in the ass, too.
I'd like to give him a shot in the ass.
Yeah.
But anyway, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
Well, it's okay.
And he... So what the story does is it takes him and explores his character.
It reveals his character with all its sort of off-putting qualities.
It's still turning, right?
It stops turning your left.
It's turning.
It's about an hour.
And when the book ends, he's just at the threshold of kind of like having gotten hit on the head hard enough that he's beginning to come to his senses.
And it's my intention that when the book ends, we see clearly that a change is certain, you know, that he really does get it now that he has to change himself in some way.
When you say he gets it, is that also what you want your reader... I mean, do you care to articulate what the reader... If the reader is getting it, do you care to articulate what you feel the reader should be getting?
I don't mind articulating what I think the reader should be getting, but I also like to think that it's in the book already.
I mean, the sort of whole last chapter of the book, it seems to me, is an effort to put that forward in his...
everything that he says quite near the end of what he has to say.
I'm not talking about the epilogue so much.
I don't give things away, by the way.
Yeah, okay.
Well, what he says near the end of the book is that, I mean, I see him as a man who's going to be embarking on some kind of genuine spiritual journey.
when the book ends, and that's really what's been missing in his life up to that point.
I mean, he's had these problems that he's somehow been able to put down, but he hasn't really replaced it, you know, with what would, you know, fill it up.
So that's why he's still so vulnerable to getting caught up in something that takes him out of his life and takes him out of his
you know, world, and, you know, and he's so taken with these sort of supernatural experiences.
I just see them as kind of the supernatural experiences, as being like drugs, like alcohol, you know, like any of the other things that people do to take themselves out of themselves.
You know, the supernatural experiences are like that.
I'm going to turn the tape.
Okay.
You know, and there's something